# The "I" Problem

*This draft is suppressed until enough examples can be accumulated
to make it sound less nit-picky!*

We live in an age that exhorts us to use "'I' statements." This is probably
sound advice for the resolution of conflict. If person *A* is inconvenienced by
person *B*'s actions, it makes sense for *A* to begin by letting *B* know about
the effects of those actions.

Things go too far, however, when "I" works its way into public presentations.
The reason is simple: when I present material about something, be it, say, a
period in Ancient Chinese history, or a new high-performance message broker,
the topic is not me. There are times when it does make sense to refer to
oneself. The audience may at some point need to know about a contribution that
the speaker has made to the topic. Or an audience member may ask for the
speaker's personal opinion about some detail. But as a rule, if the title of
the talk doesn't refer to "me", there is generally no reason to say "I".

Here's an example, from the beginning of [a talk on async/await in .NET
8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhCRX3B7qwY). Twenty seconds in, the speaker
says:
> Now, I am so excited to be here with you today, because this is a talk
> that actually made [*sic*] back in 2018, gave it for the first time at NDC
> Sydney, so it's super cool to come all the way back to Copenhagen and deliver
> it. But there's been a lot more cool stuff added to .NET since 2018. So,
> it was an hour talk back then, it's about an hour and a half talk now that
> we're just going to cram into an hour. So I'm going to move fast."

As you can see, the speaker is trying to do two things here. He's trying to
convey excitement, and he's trying to tell us that many features have been
added to .NET since 2018. Both are important points to convey, setting aside
the obvious importance of his topic.

The problem, if I can say so very respectfully, is that he hasn't conveyed
these points properly. To get an audience excited about a topic, the speaker
will first have to give facts showing that the topic is objectively exciting.
Since this needs time, it can't be done at the beginning of the talk. The most
the speaker can begin with is a *promise* that the audience will become excited
when they have heard the objective facts to follow. The way to do so is to say
something like, "There are some very exciting developments I'd like to show
you." Note how the quality of excitement is here properly transferred from the
speaker to the actual matter under discussion.

(If on the other hand the speaker really meant to express his own personal
excitement at giving the talk, then he should not have said that he was excited
"*because* this is a talk that..." He should simply have said 
"I'm excited to be here.")

In any case, the speaker would have used the audience's time more wisely if he
had condensed the paragraph above into a couple of short sentences. For
example:
> Thank you for having me today. In this talk I'll show you some exciting
> additions that have been made to .NET since I gave a version of this talk at
> NDC Sydney in 2018. I hope you understand: there are so many of them that I'm
> going to have to move fast.

This is shorter, it says "I" where it should and not where it shouldn't, and
already it generates excitement not so much by using the word "excited," but by
telling the audience that there is so much new stuff that the pace will be
faster.

I hope to add other examples here as I encounter them. But before you dismiss
such observations as nit-picky, please appreciate that the problem recurs
often, across and within talks. Added up, they become significant distractions
and waste precious time. Since the principle also applies to written
presentation, please do not hesitate to tell me if I myself am violating it,
here or elsewhere.

Thank you, and happy presenting! :wink:

<!--
But the
good news is: I've got a link down here on the slides. You'll see this link.
You'll see this QR code. Takes you to the same place. This is where you can
find everything that we're going to talk about today. So we've got some
open source code; all that's up on GitHub. You can find it at the website.
That's where you can find the slides. I also gave this talk at NDC Oslo
a couple of years ago as well. So, don't worry about trying to take notes.
Don't worry about 
-->

